1.1
Δαρείου καὶ Παρυσάτιδος γίγνονται παῖδες δύο, πρεσβύτερος μὲν Ἀρταξέρξης,
νεώτερος δὲ Κῦρος· ἐπεὶ δὲ ἠσθένει Δαρεῖος καὶ ὑπώπτευε τελευτὴν τοῦ βίου,
ἐβούλετο τὼ παῖδε ἀμφοτέρω παρεῖναι.

To Darius and Parysatis were born two sons, the elder Artaxerxes,
and the younger Cyrus. Now when Darius was ill and felt his death near,
he wanted both children to be present.


1.2. ὁ μὲν οὖν πρεσβύτερος παρὼν ἐτύγχανε·
Κῦρον δὲ μεταπέμπεται ἀπὸ τῆς ἀρχῆς ἧς αὐτὸν σατράπην ἐποίησε,
καὶ στρατηγὸν δὲ αὐτὸν ἀπέδειξε πάντων ὅσοι ἐς Καστωλοῦ πεδίον ἁθροίζονται.
ἀναβαίνει οὖν ὁ Κῦρος λαβὼν Τισσαφέρνην ὡς φίλον,
καὶ τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἔχων ὁπλίτας ἀνέβη τριακοσίους,
ἄρχοντα δὲ αὐτῶν Ξενίαν Παρράσιον.

Now the elder son happened to be at hand then,
but he sent for Cyrus from the region that he had made him satrap of,
and had also appointed him general of all those who muster at Castolus’ Plain.
Cyrus then embarked, taking along Tissaphernes as hisfriend,
and three hundred of the Greek hoplites and their commander Xenias of Parrhasia.


1.3. ἐπεὶ δὲ ἐτελεύτησε Δαρεῖος καὶ κατέστη εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν Ἀρταξέρξης,
Τισσαφέρνης διαβάλλει τὸν Κῦρον πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν ὡς ἐπιβουλεύοι αὐτῷ.
ὁ δὲ πείθεται καὶ συλλαμβάνει Κῦρον ὡς ἀποκτενῶν·
ἡ δὲ μήτηρ ἐξαιτησαμένη αὐτὸν ἀποπέμπει πάλιν ἐπὶ τὴν ἀρχήν.

After Darius passed away and Artaxerces was appointed to the kingdom,
Tissaphernes denounced Cyrus to his brother,
accusing him of plotting against him.
Artaxerces was persuaded and arrested Cyrus, intending to kill him -
but his mother gained his pardon and sent him back to his province.


1.4. ὁ δ ̓ ὡς ἀπῆλθε κινδυνεύσας καὶ ἀτιμασθείς,
βουλεύεται ὅπως μήποτε ἔτι ἔσται ἐπὶ τῷ ἀδελφῷ,
ἀλλά, ἢν δύνηται, βασιλεύσει ἀντ ̓ ἐκείνου.
Παρύσατις μὲν δὴ ἡ μήτηρ ὑπῆρχε τῷ Κύρῳ,
φιλοῦσα αὐτὸν μᾶλλον ἢ τὸν βασιλεύοντα Ἀρταξέρξην.

Now when he left, having been in danger and dishonor,
he thought on how to keep from being in his brother's power any more,
but that, if he could, he would rule over him.
Certainly, his mother Parysatis was devoted to Cyrus, loving him more
than the ruler Artaxerces.


5. ὅστις δ ̓ ἀφικνεῖτο τῶν παρὰ βασιλέως πρὸς αὐτὸν πάντας
οὕτω διατιθεὶς ἀπεπέμπετο ὥστε αὐτῷ μᾶλλον φίλους εἶναι ἢ βασιλεῖ.
καὶ τῶν παρ ̓ ἑαυτῷ δὲ βαρβάρων ἐπεμελεῖτο ὡς πολεμεῖν τε ἱκανοὶ εἴησαν καὶ
εὐνοϊκῶς ἔχοιεν αὐτῷ.

And when anyone came to him from the king,
he was treated in such a way that when he left
he was a better friend to Cyrus than to the king.
He also took care that the barbarians at his side
would be capable warriors and feel favorably towards him.


1.6. τὴν δὲ Ἑλληνικὴν δύναμιν ἥθροιζεν ὡς μάλιστα ἐδύνατο ἐπικρυπτόμενος,
ὅπως ὅτι ἀπαρασκευότατον λάβοι βασιλέα.
ὧδε οὖν ἐποιεῖτο τὴν συλλογήν.
ὁπόσας εἶχε φυλακὰς ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι παρήγγειλε τοῖς φρουράρχοις ἑκάστοις
λαμβάνειν ἄνδρας Πελοποννησίους ὅτι πλείστους καὶ βελτίστους,
ὡς ἐπιβουλεύοντος Τισσαφέρνους ταῖς πόλεσι.
καὶ γὰρ ἦσαν αἱ Ἰωνικαὶ πόλεις Τισσαφέρνους τὸ ἀρχαῖον ἐκ βασιλέως δεδομέναι,
τότε δὲ ἀφειστήκεσαν πρὸς Κῦρον πᾶσαι πλὴν Μιλήτου·

Now he gathered his Greek forces as secretly as possible,
in order to take the king completely unawares.
He accomplished the muster in this way:
For each garrison in the cities that he held, he gave orders for the commander
to accept as many of the best Peloponnesian men as he could find,
on the grounds that Tissaphernes was plotting against the cities.
For the Ionian cities had been Tissaphernes' in the beginning,
as the king had given them to him,
but they had later revolted, all except Miletus, to Cyrus.


1.7. ἐν Μιλήτῳ δὲ Τισσαφέρνης προαισθόμενος τὰ αὐτὰ ταῦτα βουλευομένους
ἀποστῆναι πρὸς Κῦρον, τοὺς μὲν αὐτῶν ἀπέκτεινε τοὺς δ ̓ ἐξέβαλεν.
ὁ δὲ Κῦρος ὑπολαβὼν τοὺς φεύγοντας συλλέξας στράτευμα ἐπολιόρκει Μίλητον
καὶ κατὰ γῆν καὶ κατὰ θάλατταν καὶ ἐπειρᾶτο κατάγειν τοὺς ἐκπεπτωκότας.
καὶ αὕτη αὖ ἄλλη πρόφασις ἦν αὐτῷ τοῦ ἁθροίζειν στράτευμα.

Tissaphernes learned that the men in Miletus were planning the same thing -
revolting to Cyrus - and he slew some of them and exiled others.
Cyrus took the fugitives in and mustered an army, 
and laid siege to Miletus both by land and sea and
tried to restore the city to the exiles.
And this was yet another pretext for him to gather an army.


1.8. πρὸς δὲ βασιλέα πέμπων ἠξίου ἀδελφὸς ὢν αὐτοῦ δοθῆναι οἷ ταύτας
τὰς πόλεις μᾶλλον ἢ Τισσαφέρνην ἄρχειν αὐτῶν,
καὶ ἡ μήτηρ συνέπραττεν αὐτῷ ταῦτα·
ὥστε βασιλεὺς τὴν μὲν πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ἐπιβουλὴν οὐκ ᾐσθάνετο,
Τισσαφέρνει δ ̓ ἐνόμιζε πολεμοῦντα αὐτὸν ἀμφὶ τὰ στρατεύματα δαπανᾶν·
ὥστε οὐδὲν ἤχθετο αὐτῶν πολεμούντων.
καὶ γὰρ ὁ Κῦρος ἀπέπεμπε τοὺς γιγνομένους δασμοὺς βασιλεῖ
ἐκ τῶν πόλεων ὧν Τισσαφέρνους ἐτύγχανεν ἔχων.

He sent to the king, requesting, as he was his brother,
that these cities be given to him rather than to Tissaphernes,
and his mother concurred in this.
As a result the king didn't perceive the plot against himself,
believing that he was spending on armies to go to war against Tissaphernes -
and he was mightily pleased to see them at war with each other.
And in fact, Cyrus sent the king regular tributes
from the cities of Tissaphernes that he happened to hold.


1.9. ἄλλο δὲ στράτευμα αὐτῷ συνελέγετο ἐν Χερρονήσῳ
τῇ κατ̓ ἀντιπέρας Ἀβύδου τόνδε τὸν τρόπον.
Κλέαρχος Λακεδαιμόνιος φυγὰς ἦν· τούτῳ συγγενόμενος ὁ
Κῦρος ἠγάσθη τε αὐτὸν καὶ δίδωσιν αὐτῷ μυρίους δαρεικούς.
ὁ δὲ λαβὼν τὸ χρυσίον στράτευμα συνέλεξεν ἀπὸ τούτων τῶν
χρημάτων καὶ ἐπολέμει ἐκ Χερρονήσου ὁρμώμενος τοῖς Θρᾳξὶ
τοῖς ὑπὲρ Ἑλλήσποντον οἰκοῦσι καὶ ὠφέλει τοὺς Ἕλληνας·
ὥστε καὶ χρήματα συνεβάλλοντο αὐτῷ εἰς τὴν τροφὴν τῶν
στρατιωτῶν αἱ Ἑλλησποντιακαὶ πόλεις ἑκοῦσαι.
τοῦτο δ ̓ αὖ οὕτω τρεφόμενον ἐλάνθανεν αὐτῷ τὸ στράτευμα.

Another army was being assembled for him, on the Chersonese
peninsula opposite Abydus, in this way.
Clearchus was an exile from Sparta: Cyrus was acquainted with him
and admired him, and gave him ten thousand gold coins.
And he took the gold and gathered an army with it,
and, to aid the Greeks, started a war from the Chersonese
with the Thracians that lived above the Hellespont.
In aid of this, the cities of the Hellespont also willingly
contributed money to him for the soldiers' rations.
And thus this fresh army was secretly maintained for him.


1.10. Ἀρίστιππος δὲ ὁ Θετταλὸς ξένος ὢν ἐτύγχανεν αὐτῷ,
καὶ πιεζόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν οἴκοι ἀντιστασιωτῶν ἔρχεται πρὸς τὸν Κῦρον
καὶ αἰτεῖ αὐτὸν εἰς δισχιλίους ξένους καὶ τριῶν μηνῶν μισθόν,
ὡς οὕτως περιγενόμενος ἂν τῶν ἀντιστασιωτῶν.
ὁ δὲ Κῦρος δίδωσιν αὐτῷ εἰς τετρακισχιλίους καὶ ἓξ μηνῶν μισθόν,
καὶ δεῖται αὐτοῦ μὴ πρόσθεν καταλῦσαι πρὸς τοὺς ἀντιστασιώτας
πρὶν ἂν αὐτῷ συμβουλεύσηται.
οὕτω δὲ αὖ τὸ ἐν Θετταλίᾳ ἐλάνθανεν αὐτῷ τρεφόμενον στράτευμα.

Aristippus the Thessalian - a friend of his -
was under pressure at home from an opposition party.
He went to Cyrus and asked him for wages for two thousand mercenaries for
three months, in order to prevail over that faction.
And Cyrus gave him six months wages for four thousand,
and asked that he not destroy the opposition
until he had a chance to consult with him.
And so another army was built up for him in Thessaly without being noticed.


1.11. Πρόξενον δὲ τὸν Βοιώτιον ξένον ὄντα ἐκέλευσε λαβόντα ἄνδρας
ὅτι πλείστους παραγενέσθαι, ὡς ἐς Πισίδας βουλόμενος στρατεύεσθαι,
ὡς πράγματα παρεχόντων τῶν Πισιδῶν τῇ ἑαυτοῦ χώρᾳ.
Σοφαίνετον δὲ τὸν Στυμφάλιον καὶ Σωκράτην τὸν Ἀχαιόν,
ξένους ὄντας καὶ τούτους, ἐκέλευσεν ἄνδρας λαβόντας ἐλθεῖν ὅτι πλείστους,
ὡς πολεμήσων Τισσαφέρνει σὺν τοῖς φυγάσι τοῖς Μιλησίων.
καὶ ἐποίουν οὕτως οὗτοι.

He urged Proxenus the Boeotian, a friend of his,
to come bringing as many men as he could,
as if he wished to march into Pisidia,
seeing that the Pisidians were causing trouble for his province.
He urged Sophaenetus the Stymphalian and Socrates the Achaian,
who were also friends of his, to march with as many men as they could
as if to fight Tissaphernes, along with the Milesian exiles.
And they acted in this manner.


2.1. ἐπεὶ δ ̓ ἐδόκει ἤδη πορεύεσθαι αὐτῷ ἄνω, τὴν μὲν πρόφασιν ἐποιεῖτο
ὡς Πισίδας βουλόμενος ἐκβαλεῖν παντάπασιν ἐκ τῆς χώρας·
καὶ ἁθροίζει ὡς ἐπὶ τούτους τό τε βαρβαρικὸν καὶ τὸ Ἑλληνικόν.
ἐνταῦθα καὶ παραγγέλλει τῷ τε Κλεάρχῳ λαβόντι ἥκειν ὅσον
ἦν αὐτῷ στράτευμα καὶ τῷ Ἀριστίππῳ συναλλαγέντι πρὸς
τοὺς οἴκοι ἀποπέμψαι πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ὃ εἶχε στράτευμα·
καὶ Ξενίᾳ τῷ Ἀρκάδι, ὃς αὐτῷ προειστήκει τοῦ ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι ξενικοῦ,
ἥκειν παραγγέλλει λαβόντα τοὺς ἄλλους πλὴν ὁπόσοι ἱκανοὶ ἦσαν
τὰς ἀκροπόλεις φυλάττειν.
ἐκάλεσε δὲ καὶ τοὺς Μίλητον πολιορκοῦντας,

When it seemed a good time for him to march inland,
he claimed that he wanted to totally expel the Pisidians from the country,
and mustered both his barbarian and Greek armies as if against them.
He also sent orders to Clearchus to come there with as large an army as he
could, and to Aristippus to reconcile with his enemies at home
and send him however large an army that he had:
and he commanded Xenias the Arkadian,
who was in charge of the foreign army in the cities,
to leave only enough men to defend the citadels and sail to him with the rest.
He also summoned the men who were besieging Miletus


2.2. καὶ τοὺς φυγάδας ἐκέλευσε σὺν αὐτῷ στρατεύεσθαι,
ὑποσχόμενος αὐτοῖς, εἰ καλῶς καταπράξειεν ἐφ ̓ ἃ ἐστρατεύετο,
μὴ πρόσθεν παύσεσθαι πρὶν αὐτοὺς καταγάγοι οἴκαδε.
οἱ δὲ ἡδέως ἐπείθοντο· ἐπίστευον γὰρ αὐτῷ·
καὶ λαβόντες τὰ ὅπλα παρῆσαν εἰς Σάρδεις.

and ordered the exiles to advance with him,
promising them that if he accomplished what he had set out to do,
he would not rest until he had led them back home.
And they happily agreed, for they trusted him,
and took up arms and readied themselves at Sardis.
 

2.3. Ξενίας μὲν δὴ τοὺς ἐκ τῶν πόλεων λαβὼν
παρεγένετο εἰς Σάρδεις ὁπλίτας εἰς τετρακισχιλίους,
Πρόξενος δὲ παρῆν ἔχων ὁπλίτας μὲν εἰς πεντακοσίους καὶ χιλίους,
γυμνῆτας δὲ πεντακοσίους, Σοφαίνετος δὲ ὁ Στυμφάλιος ὁπλίτας ἔχων χιλίους,
Σωκράτης δὲ ὁ Ἀχαιὸς ὁπλίτας ἔχων ὡς πεντακοσίους,
Πασίων δὲ ὁ Μεγαρεὺς τριακοσίους μὲν ὁπλίτας,
τριακοσίους δὲ πελταστὰς ἔχων παρεγένετο ἦν δὲ καὶ

And indeed Xenias came to Sardis, bringing nearly four thousand heavily armed
men from the cities, while Proxenus came with close to fifteen hundred heavily
armed men and five hundred lightly arms ones,
Sophaenetus the Stymphalian with a thousand heavily armed men,
and Socrates the Achaean with about five hundred heavily armed men,
Pasion the Megarian came with three hundred heavily armed men
and three hundred light troops -
both...


2.4. οὗτος καὶ ὁ Σωκράτης τῶν ἀμφὶ Μίλητον στρατευομένων.
οὗτοι μὲν εἰς Σάρδεις αὐτῷ ἀφίκοντο.
Τισσαφέρνης δὲ κατανοήσας ταῦτα,
καὶ μείζονα ἡγησάμενος εἶναι ἢ ὡς ἐπὶ Πισίδας τὴν παρασκευήν,
πορεύεται ὡς βασιλέα ᾗ ἐδύνατο τάχιστα ἱππέας ἔχων ὡς πεντακοσίους.

...he and Socrates were among those who had fought against Miletus.
These men came to him at Sardis.
Tissaphernes caught wind of this,
and thinking it too much preparation to be against the Pisidians,
set out to the king as swiftly as he could
along with five hundred horsemen.


2.5. καὶ βασιλεὺς μὲν δὴ ἐπεὶ ἤκουσε Τισσαφέρνους τὸν Κύρου στόλον,
ἀντιπαρεσκευάζετο.
Κῦρος δὲ ἔχων οὓς εἴρηκα ὡρμᾶτο ἀπὸ Σάρδεων·
καὶ ἐξελαύνει διὰ τῆς Λυδίας σταθμοὺς τρεῖς παρασάγγας εἴκοσι
καὶ δύο ἐπὶ τὸν Μαίανδρον ποταμόν.
τούτου τὸ εὖρος δύο πλέθρα· γέφυρα δὲ ἐπῆν ἐζευγμένη πλοίοις.

And when the king heard of Cyrus' expedition from Tissaphernes,
he prepared his own response.
Cyrus, along with the men that I've listed, set out from Sardis
and marched 75 miles in three stages through Lydia to the Maeander River.
This river is two hundred feet wide -
a pontoon bridge was built across it, using boats lashed together.


2.6. τοῦτον διαβὰς ἐξελαύνει διὰ Φρυγίας σταθμὸν ἕνα παρασάγγας ὀκτὼ εἰς Κολοσσάς,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην καὶ εὐδαίμονα καὶ μεγάλην.
ἐνταῦθα ἔμεινεν ἡμέρας ἑπτά· καὶ ἧκε Μένων
ὁ Θετταλὸς ὁπλίτας ἔχων χιλίους καὶ πελταστὰς πεντακοσίους,
Δόλοπας καὶ Αἰνιᾶνας καὶ Ὀλυνθίους.

After crossing over the river, he marched for 25 miles in one stage through
Phrygia to Colossae, an inhabited city both wealthy and large.
He stayed there seven days, and Menon the Thessalian arrived,
with a thousand heavily armed men and five hundred lighter ones -
Dolopians and Aenianians and Olynthians.


2.7. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς τρεῖς παρασάγγας εἴκοσιν εἰς Κελαινάς,
τῆς Φρυγίας πόλιν οἰκουμένην, μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα.
ἐνταῦθα Κύρῳ βασίλεια ἦν καὶ παράδεισος μέγας ἀγρίων θηρίων πλήρης,
ἃ ἐκεῖνος ἐθήρευεν ἀπὸ ἵππου, ὁπότε γυμνάσαι βούλοιτο ἑαυτόν τε καὶ τοὺς ἵππους.
διὰ μέσου δὲ τοῦ παραδείσου ῥεῖ ὁ Μαίανδρος ποταμός·
αἱ δὲ πηγαὶ αὐτοῦ εἰσιν ἐκ τῶν βασιλείων·
ῥεῖ δὲ καὶ διὰ τῆς Κελαινῶν πόλεως.

From there he marched for three stages and 120 kilometers to Celaenae,
an inhabited city of the Phrygians, large and wealthy.
Cyrus had a palace and a large enclosed park there filled with wild animals,
and hunted them from horseback when he wished to exercise himself and his horses.
The Maeander River flows through the middle of the park -
its sources are under the palace - and through the city of Celaenae.


2.8. ἔστι δὲ καὶ μεγάλου βασιλέως βασίλεια ἐν Κελαιναῖς ἐρυμνὰ
ἐπὶ ταῖς πηγαῖς τοῦ Μαρσύου ποταμοῦ ὑπὸ τῇ ἀκροπόλει·
ῥεῖ δὲ καὶ οὗτος διὰ τῆς πόλεως καὶ ἐμβάλλει εἰς τὸν Μαίανδρον·
τοῦ δὲ Μαρσύου τὸ εὖρός ἐστιν εἴκοσι καὶ πέντε
ποδῶν. ἐνταῦθα λέγεται Ἀπόλλων ἐκδεῖραι Μαρσύαν νικήσας ἐρίζοντά οἱ περὶ σοφίας,
καὶ τὸ δέρμα κρεμάσαι ἐν τῷ ἄντρῳ ὅθεν αἱ πηγαί·
διὰ δὲ τοῦτο ὁ ποταμὸς καλεῖται Μαρσύας.

The Great King also has a fortified palace there in Celaenae,
below the citadel and built over the sources of the Marsyas River -
which also flows through the city and into the Maeander -
the Marsyas is twenty-five feet in width.
It's where Apollo is said to have flayed Marsyas
- defeated in a contest on musical skill -
and to have hung the skin in the cave that the sources spring from -
due to this the river is called Marsyas.


2.9. ἐνταῦθα Ξέρξης, ὅτε ἐκ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἡττηθεὶς τῇ μάχῃ ἀπεχώρει,
λέγεται οἰκοδομῆσαι ταῦτά τε τὰ βασίλεια καὶ τὴν Κελαινῶν ἀκρόπολιν.
ἐνταῦθα ἔμεινε Κῦρος ἡμέρας τριάκοντα·
καὶ ἧκε Κλέαρχος ὁ Λακεδαιμόνιος φυγὰς ἔχων ὁπλίτας χιλίους
καὶ πελταστὰς Θρᾷκας ὀκτακοσίους
καὶ τοξότας Κρῆτας διακοσίους.
ἅμα δὲ καὶ Σῶσις παρῆν ὁ Συρακόσιος ἔχων ὁπλίτας τριακοσίους,
καὶ Σοφαίνετος Ἀρκάδας ἔχων ὁπλίτας χιλίους.
καὶ ἐνταῦθα Κῦρος ἐξέτασιν
καὶ ἀριθμὸν τῶν Ἑλλήνων ἐποίησεν ἐν τῷ παραδείσῳ,
καὶ ἐγένοντο οἱ σύμπαντες ὁπλῖται μὲν μύριοι χίλιοι,
πελτασταὶ δὲ ἀμφὶ τοὺς δισχιλίους.

There Xerxes, after retreating after his defeat in the battle with Greece,
is said to have built both this palace and Celaenae's citadel.
There Cyrus remained for thirty days -
and Clearchus the Spartan exile came
with a thousand hoplites and eight hundred shield-bearing Thracians
and two hundred Cretan archers.
At the same time Sosis the Syracusan came with three hundred hoplites,
and Sophaenetus the Arcadian with a thousand hoplites.
And there Cyrus conducted a review and a count of the Greeks in the park,
and the hoplites came to eleven thousand altogether,
the shield-bearers around two thousand.


2.10. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας δέκα εἰς Πέλτας,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην.
ἐνταῦθ̓ ἔμεινεν ἡμέρας τρεῖς·
ἐν αἷς Ξενίας ὁ Ἀρκὰς τὰ Λύκαια ἔθυσε καὶ ἀγῶνα ἔθηκε·
τὰ δὲ ἆθλα ἦσαν στλεγγίδες χρυσαῖ· ἐθεώρει δὲ τὸν ἀγῶνα καὶ Κῦρος.

From there he drove for two stages in ten parasangs to Peltae,
an inhabited city.
There he stayed three days -
and Xenias the Arcadian made sacrifices for the festival of Lycaea
and arranged contests there - the prizes were golden strigils -
and Cyrus watched the contests.


2.11. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας δώδεκα ἐς Κεράμων Ἀγοράν,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην, ἐσχάτην πρὸς τῇ Μυσίᾳ χώρᾳ.
ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς τρεῖς παρασάγγας τριάκοντα εἰς Καΰστρου-πεδίον,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην.
ἐνταῦθ̓ ἔμεινεν ἡμέρας πέντε·
καὶ τοῖς στρατιώταις ὠφείλετο μισθὸς πλέον ἢ τριῶν μηνῶν,
καὶ πολλάκις ἰόντες ἐπὶ τὰς θύρας ἀπῄτουν.
ὁ δὲ ἐλπίδας λέγων διῆγε καὶ δῆλος ἦν ἀνιώμενος·
οὐ γὰρ ἦν πρὸς τοῦ Κύρου τρόπου ἔχοντα μὴ ἀποδιδόναι.

From there he marched twelve parasangs in two stages to the Ceramon Market,
an inhabited city, the farthest in the direction of Mysia.
From there he marched thirty parasangs in three stages to Caystrou-pedion,
an inhabited city.
He remained there five days, and wages were owed to the soldiers -
full wages for three months,
and many times men would come up to the doors and demand it.
And he continued expressing hopes and was clearly distressed -
for it was not in Cyrus' nature to not pay if he had the money.


2.12. ἐνταῦθα ἀφικνεῖται Ἐπύαξα ἡ Συεννέσιος γυνὴ τοῦ Κιλίκων βασιλέως
παρὰ Κῦρον· καὶ ἐλέγετο Κύρῳ δοῦναι χρήματα πολλά.
τῇ δ ̓ οὖν στρατιᾷ τότε ἀπέδωκε Κῦρος μισθὸν τεττάρων μηνῶν.
εἶχε δὲ ἡ Κίλισσα φυλακὴν [καὶ φύλακας] περὶ αὑτὴν Κίλικας καὶ Ἀσπενδίους·
ἐλέγετο δὲ καὶ συγγενέσθαι Κῦρον τῇ Κιλίσσῃ.

Then Epyaxa, the wife of Syennesis, the king of the Cilicians, came to Cyrus -
and she was said to have given great wealth to him.
In any case Cyrus repaid four months wages to the army at that time.
The Cilician queen had both Cilician and Aspendian guards about her -
it was said that she and Cyrus had sex.


2.13. ἐντεῦθεν δὲ ἐλαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας δέκα εἰς Θύμβριον,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην.
ἐνταῦθα ἦν παρὰ τὴν ὁδὸν κρήνη ἡ Μίδου καλουμένη τοῦ Φρυγῶν βασιλέως,
ἐφ ̓ ᾗ λέγεται Μίδας τὸν Σάτυρον θηρεῦσαι οἴνῳ κεράσας αὐτήν.

Then he marched ten parasangs in two stages to Thymbrion, an inhabited city.
There was a spring beside the road - the so-called Spring of Midas
(the Phrygian king).
Midas is said to have captured the Satyr there,
by mixing wine into the spring's water.


2.14. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας δέκα εἰς Τυριάειον,
πόλιν οἰκουμένην.
ἐνταῦθα ἔμεινεν ἡμέρας τρεῖς.
καὶ λέγεται δεηθῆναι ἡ Κίλισσα Κύρου ἐπιδεῖξαι τὸ στράτευμα αὐτῇ·
βουλόμενος οὖν ἐπιδεῖξαι ἐξέτασιν ποιεῖται
ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ τῶν Ἑλλήνων καὶ τῶν βαρβάρων.

Then he marched ten parasangs in two stages to Tyriaeum, an inhabited city.
He stayed there for three days.
And it is said that the Cilician queen asked Cyrus to show her his army -
most willingly, he set up a review of both the Greeks and the barbarians
on the plain.


2.15. ἐκέλευσε δὲ τοὺς Ἕλληνας ὡς νόμος αὐτοῖς εἰς μάχην οὕτω ταχθῆναι καὶ
στῆναι, συντάξαι δ̓ ἕκαστον τοὺς ἑαυτοῦ.
ἐτάχθησαν οὖν ἐπὶ τεττάρων· εἶχε δὲ τὸ μὲν δεξιὸν Μένων καὶ οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ,
τὸ δὲ εὐώνυμον Κλέαρχος καὶ οἱ ἐκείνου, τὸ δὲ μέσον οἱ ἄλλοι στρατηγοί.

He ordered the Greeks to form up and get into position for battle
in their customary way, with each general marshalling his own men.
So they drew up in lines four deep -
Menon and his men had the right wing, Clearchus and his men the left,
and the other generals the center.


2.16. ἐθεώρει οὖν ὁ Κῦρος πρῶτον μὲν τοὺς βαρβάρους·
οἱ δὲ παρήλαυνον τεταγμένοι κατὰ ἴλας καὶ κατὰ τάξεις·
εἶτα δὲ τοὺς Ἕλληνας, παρελαύνων ἐφ ̓ ἅρματος καὶ ἡ Κίλισσα ἐφ ̓ ἁρμαμάξης.
εἶχον δὲ πάντες κράνη χαλκᾶ καὶ χιτῶνας φοινικοῦς καὶ κνημῖδας
καὶ τὰς ἀσπίδας ἐκκεκαλυμμένας.

Then Cyrus first inspected the barbarians -
and they marched past, formed up in troops and in ranks;
and then they drove past the Greeks,
with him in a chariot and the Cilician queen in a carriage.
They all wore bronze helmets and crimson tunics and leggings
and carried their round shields uncovered.


2.17. ἐπειδὴ δὲ πάντας παρήλασε, στήσας τὸ ἅρμα πρὸ τῆς φάλαγγος μέσης,
πέμψας Πίγρητα τὸν ἑρμηνέα παρὰ τοὺς στρατηγοὺς τῶν Ἑλλήνων
ἐκέλευσε προβαλέσθαι τὰ ὅπλα καὶ ἐπιχωρῆσαι ὅλην τὴν φάλαγγα.
οἱ δὲ ταῦτα προεῖπον τοῖς στρατιώταις· καὶ ἐπεὶ ἐσάλπιγξε,
προβαλόμενοι τὰ ὅπλα ἐπῇσαν.
ἐκ δὲ τούτου θᾶττον προϊόντων σὺν κραυγῇ ἀπὸ τοῦ αὐτομάτου δρόμος ἐγένετο
τοῖς στρατιώταις ἐπὶ τὰς σκηνάς,

When he had driven past all of them,
he came to a stop in the front of the middle of the army,
and, sending his interpreter Pigres to the Greeks' commanders,
he ordered them to present arms and advance the entire battle-array.
And they relayed these orders to the soldiers:
and when the trumpet sounded, they presented arms and charged.
Then, advancing more swiftly, they gave a shout and
of their own accord started running towards the tents,


2.18. τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων φόβος πολύς,
καὶ ἥ τε Κίλισσα ἔφυγεν ἐπὶ τῆς ἁρμαμάξης
καὶ οἱ ἐκ τῆς ἀγορᾶς καταλιπόντες τὰ ὤνια ἔφυγον.
οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες σὺν γέλωτι ἐπὶ τὰς σκηνὰς ἦλθον.
ἡ δὲ Κίλισσα ἰδοῦσα τὴν λαμπρότητα καὶ τὴν τάξιν τοῦ στρατεύματος ἐθαύμασε.
Κῦρος δὲ ἥσθη τὸν ἐκ τῶν Ἑλλήνων εἰς τοὺς βαρβάρους φόβον ἰδών.

and the barbarians felt great fear.
The Cilician queen fled in her carriage
and the men in the market places fled, abandoning their wares,
while the Greeks, laughing, walked up to the tents.
The Cilician queen marvelled when she saw the army's brilliance and management,
while Cyrus was delighted to see the barbarians' fear of the Greeks.


2.19. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς τρεῖς παρασάγγας εἴκοσιν εἰς Ἰκόνιον,
τῆς Φρυγίας πόλιν ἐσχάτην. ἐνταῦθα ἔμεινε τρεῖς ἡμέρας.
ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει διὰ τῆς Λυκαονίας σταθμοὺς πέντε παρασάγγας τριάκοντα.
ταύτην τὴν χώραν ἐπέτρεψε διαρπάσαι τοῖς Ἕλλησιν ὡς πολεμίαν οὖσαν.

Then he marched for twenty parasangs in three stages to Iconium,
the most distant city of Phrygia. He stayed there for three days.
From there he marched through Lucaonia for thirty parasangs in five stages.
He turned that whole country over to the Greeks to plunder as the spoils of war.


2.20. ἐντεῦθεν Κῦρος τὴν Κίλισσαν εἰς τὴν Κιλικίαν ἀποπέμπει τὴν ταχίστην ὁδόν·
καὶ συνέπεμψεν αὐτῇ στρατιώτας οὓς Μένων εἶχε καὶ αὐτόν.
Κῦρος δὲ μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἐξελαύνει διὰ Καππαδοκίας σταθμοὺς τέτταρας παρασάγγας
εἴκοσι καὶ πέντε πρὸς Δάναν, πόλιν οἰκουμένην, μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα.
ἐνταῦθα ἔμειναν ἡμέρας τρεῖς·
ἐν ᾧ Κῦρος ἀπέκτεινεν ἄνδρα Πέρσην Μεγαφέρνην, φοινικιστὴν βασίλειον,
καὶ ἕτερόν τινα τῶν ὑπάρχων δυνάστην, αἰτιασάμενος ἐπιβουλεύειν αὐτῷ.

Cyrus sent the Cilician queen off from there to Cilicia by the quickest route -
and sent some of Menon's soldiers with her, as well as Menon himself,
while Cyrus and the rest marched through Cappadocia to Dana,
a large and wealthy inhabited city, for twenty five parasangs in four stages.
He stayed there three days -
while there Cyrus killed a Persian man called Megaphernes, a royal dignitary,
and one of his lieutenants, on the grounds that they were plotting against him.


2.21. ἐντεῦθεν ἐπειρῶντο εἰσβάλλειν εἰς τὴν Κιλικίαν·
ἡ δὲ εἰσβολὴ ἦν ὁδὸς ἁμαξιτὸς ὀρθία ἰσχυρῶς
καὶ ἀμήχανος εἰσελθεῖν στρατεύματι, εἴ τις ἐκώλυεν.
ἐλέγετο δὲ καὶ Συέννεσις εἶναι ἐπὶ τῶν ἄκρων φυλάττων τὴν εἰσβολήν·
διὸ ἔμεινεν ἡμέραν ἐν τῷ πεδίῳ.
τῇ δ ̓ ὑστεραίᾳ ἧκεν ἄγγελος λέγων ὅτι λελοιπὼς εἴη Συέννεσις τὰ ἄκρα,
ἐπεὶ ᾔσθετο ὅτι τὸ Μένωνος στράτευμα ἤδη ἐν Κιλικίᾳ ἦν εἴσω τῶν ὀρέων,
καὶ ὅτι τριήρεις ἤκουε περιπλεούσας ἀπ ̓ Ἰωνίας εἰς Κιλικίαν Ταμὼν ἔχοντα
τὰς Λακεδαιμονίων καὶ αὐτοῦ Κύρου.

From there they endeavored to enter Cilicia - where the way in was a wagon road,
severely steep and impracticable for the army if anyone opposed them.
And it was said that Syennesis was on the hilltops guarding the way in -
and on this account Cyrus remained on the plain for a day.
The next day a messenger came to tell him that Syennesis had left the hilltops
once he got word that Menon's army had already reached Cilicia,
on the other side of the mountains, and that Tamus was sailing triremes,
owned by Sparta and by Cyrus himself, from Ionia to Cilicia. 

2.22. Κῦρος δ ̓ οὖν ἀνέβη ἐπὶ τὰ ὄρη οὐδενὸς κωλύοντος,
καὶ εἶδε τὰς σκηνὰς οὗ οἱ Κίλικες ἐφύλαττον.
ἐντεῦθεν δὲ κατέβαινεν εἰς πεδίον μέγα καὶ καλόν,
ἐπίρρυτον, καὶ δένδρων παντοδαπῶν σύμπλεων καὶ ἀμπέλων·
πολὺ δὲ καὶ σήσαμον καὶ μελίνην καὶ κέγχρον καὶ πυροὺς καὶ κριθὰς φέρει.
ὄρος δ ̓ αὐτὸ περιεῖχεν ὀχυρὸν καὶ ὑψηλὸν πάντῃ ἐκ θαλάττης εἰς θάλατταν.

In any case, Cyrus climbed into the mountains with no opposition,
and saw the camp where the Cilicians had been keeping watch.
From there he descended into a large and beautiful plain,
abundant with trees of every sort and quite full of grape-vines -
and it grows much sesame and Italian and common millet and wheat and barley.
While a secure and lofty mountain range encompasses the plain 
on every side from sea to sea.


2.23. καταβὰς δὲ διὰ τούτου τοῦ πεδίου ἤλασε σταθμοὺς τέτταρας παρασάγγας
πέντε καὶ εἴκοσιν εἰς Ταρσούς, τῆς Κιλικίας πόλιν μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα,
οὗ ἦν τὰ Συεννέσιος βασίλεια τοῦ Κιλίκων βασιλέως·
διὰ μέσου δὲ τῆς πόλεως ῥεῖ ποταμὸς Κύδνος ὄνομα, εὖρος δύο πλέθρων.

After crossing this plain he drove twenty-five parasangs in four stages
to Tarsus, a large and prosperous Cilician city,
where the palace of Syennesis, the king of the Cilicians, was -
and through the middle of this city flows a river named the Cydnus,
two hundred feet across.


2.24. ταύτην τὴν πόλιν ἐξέλιπον οἱ ἐνοικοῦντες μετὰ Συεννέσιος
εἰς χωρίον ὀχυρὸν ἐπὶ τὰ ὄρη πλὴν οἱ τὰ καπηλεῖα ἔχοντες·
ἔμειναν δὲ καὶ οἱ παρὰ τὴν θάλατταν οἰκοῦντες ἐν Σόλοις καὶ ἐν Ἰσσοῖς.

The inhabitants, along with Syennesis, abandoned this city for a safe region
in the mountains, except for those who owned shops -
these stayed and also those living along the sea in Soli and Issus.


2.25.
Ἐπύαξα δὲ ἡ Συεννέσιος γυνὴ προτέρα Κύρου πέντε ἡμέραις εἰς Ταρσοὺς ἀφίκετο·
ἐν δὲ τῇ ὑπερβολῇ τῶν ὀρέων τῇ εἰς τὸ πεδίον δύο λόχοι τοῦ Μένωνος στρατεύματος
ἀπώλοντο· οἱ μὲν ἔφασαν ἁρπάζοντάς τι κατακοπῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν Κιλίκων,
οἱ δὲ ὑπολειφθέντας καὶ οὐ δυναμένους εὑρεῖν τὸ ἄλλο στράτευμα οὐδὲ τὰς ὁδοὺς
εἶτα πλανωμένους ἀπολέσθαι· ἦσαν δ ̓ οὖν οὗτοι ἑκατὸν ὁπλῖται.

Syennesis' wife, Epyaxa, had arrived in Tarsus five days before Cyrus -
but two companies of Menon's army were lost while crossing the mountains
to the plain  -
some said that they'd been cut down by the Cilicians while plundering,
while others that they'd fallen behind and couldn't find
the rest of the army or the roads and wandered about until they perished.
In either case they were a hundred hoplites.


2.26. οἱ δ̓ ἄλλοι ἐπεὶ ἧκον, τήν τε πόλιν τοὺς Ταρσοὺς διήρπασαν,
διὰ τὸν ὄλεθρον τῶν συστρατιωτῶν ὀργιζόμενοι, καὶ τὰ βασίλεια τὰ ἐν αὐτῇ.
Κῦρος δ̓ ἐπεὶ εἰσήλασεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν, μετεπέμπετο τὸν Συέννεσιν πρὸς ἑαυτόν·
ὁ δ̓ οὔτε πρότερον οὐδενί πω κρείττονι ἑαυτοῦ εἰς χεῖρας ἐλθεῖν ἔφη οὔτε τότε
Κύρῳ ἰέναι ἤθελε, πρὶν ἡ γυνὴ αὐτὸν ἔπεισε καὶ πίστεις ἔλαβε.

But when the rest of the army arrived, they plundered both the city of Tarsus
and the palace in it, angered due to the deaths of their fellow soldiers.
And when Cyrus marched into the city,
he called for Syennesis to appear before him - but Syennesis kept saying that 
he had never before come into the hands of anyone more powerful than himself,
and did not wish to now come to into Cyrus',
until his wife persuaded him and he had received pledges.


2.27. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα ἐπεὶ συνεγένοντο ἀλλήλοις,
Συέννεσις μὲν ἔδωκε Κύρῳ χρήματα πολλὰ εἰς τὴν στρατιάν,
Κῦρος δὲ ἐκείνῳ δῶρα ἃ νομίζεται παρὰ βασιλεῖ τίμια,
ἵππον χρυσοχάλινον καὶ στρεπτὸν χρυσοῦν καὶ ψέλια καὶ ἀκινάκην χρυσοῦν καὶ
στολὴν Περσικήν, καὶ τὴν χώραν μηκέτι διαρπάζεσθαι·
τὰ δὲ ἡρπασμένα ἀνδράποδα, ἤν που ἐντυγχάνωσιν, ἀπολαμβάνειν.

When they had conversed with each other after this,
Syennesis gave Cyrus great wealth for his army, and Cyrus gave him gifts
that are considered valuable in the court of the king,
a horse with a gold-studded bridle and a gold torq and armlets
and a gold sword and a Persian robe, and that the land no longer be plundered -
any slave who was carried off, if they could be found, could be taken back.


3.1. ἐνταῦθα ἔμεινεν ὁ Κῦρος καὶ ἡ στρατιὰ ἡμέρας εἴκοσιν·
οἱ γὰρ στρατιῶται οὐκ ἔφασαν ἰέναι τοῦ πρόσω· ὑπώπτευον
γὰρ ἤδη ἐπὶ βασιλέα ἰέναι· μισθωθῆναι δὲ οὐκ ἐπὶ τούτῳ ἔφασαν.
πρῶτος δὲ Κλέαρχος τοὺς αὑτοῦ στρατιώτας ἐβιάζετο ἰέναι·
οἱ δ ̓ αὐτόν τε ἔβαλλον καὶ τὰ ὑποζύγια τὰ ἐκείνου, ἐπεὶ ἄρξαιντο προϊέναι.

Cyrus and the army remained there for twenty days -
for the soldiers refused to go further -
for they were already suspicious that they were to go against the king  -
and they said that they hadn't been hired for that.
At first Clearchus tried to force his soldiers to march out -
but they cast stones at him and his beasts as they started to advance.


3.2. Κλέαρχος δὲ τότε μὲν μικρὸν ἐξέφυγε μὴ καταπετρωθῆναι,
ὕστερον δ ̓ ἐπεὶ ἔγνω ὅτι οὐ δυνήσεται βιάσασθαι,
συνήγαγεν ἐκκλησίαν τῶν αὑτοῦ στρατιωτῶν.
καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ἐδάκρυε πολὺν χρόνον ἑστώς·
οἱ δὲ ὁρῶντες ἐθαύμαζον καὶ ἐσιώπων· εἶτα δὲ ἔλεξε τοιάδε.

Then Clearchus fled a little bit away, to keep from getting killed,
and when he realized that he wouldn't be able to force them,
he called for an assembly of his soldiers.
And first he stood for a long time and wept -
those watching him marveled in silence -
and then he spoke thusly:


3.3. “ἄνδρες στρατιῶται,
μὴ θαυμάζετε ὅτι χαλεπῶς φέρω τοῖς παροῦσι πράγμασιν.
ἐμοὶ γὰρ ξένος Κῦρος ἐγένετο καί με φεύγοντα ἐκ τῆς πατρίδος τά τε ἄλλα ἐτίμησε
καὶ μυρίους ἔδωκε δαρεικούς·
οὓς ἐγὼ λαβὼν οὐκ εἰς τὸ ἴδιον κατεθέμην ἐμοὶ οὐδὲ καθηδυπάθησα,
ἀλλ ̓ εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐδαπάνων.

"Fellow soldiers, marvel not that I bear these present affairs with difficulty.
For Cyrus has become my friend and honored me when I fled my native land
both in other ways and in giving me many gold coins -
and when I received this I neither deposited it for myself
nor squandered it, but spent it on you.


3.4. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν πρὸς τοὺς Θρᾷκας ἐπολέμησα,
καὶ ὑπὲρ τῆς Ἑλλάδος ἐτιμωρούμην μεθ̓ ὑμῶν,
ἐκ τῆς Χερρονήσου αὐτοὺς ἐξελαύνων βουλομένους ἀφαιρεῖσθαι τοὺς ἐνοικοῦντας
Ἕλληνας τὴν γῆν.
ἐπειδὴ δὲ Κῦρος ἐκάλει, λαβὼν ὑμᾶς ἐπορευόμην,
ἵνα εἴ τι δέοιτο ὠφελοίην αὐτὸν ἀνθ̓ ὧν εὖ ἔπαθον ὑπ ̓ ἐκείνου.

And at first I fought against the Thracians,
and sought vengeance on behalf of Greece along with you,
driving out of Crimea those who wished to deprive
the Greeks living there of their land.
Then when Cyrus summoned me, I took you and marched,
in order to aid him if he should need it,
in return for the good treatment that I had from him.


3.5 ἐπεὶ δὲ ὑμεῖς οὐ βούλεσθε συμπορεύεσθαι,
ἀνάγκη δή μοι ἢ ὑμᾶς προδόντα τῇ Κύρου φιλίᾳ χρῆσθαι ἢ πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ψευσάμενον
μεθ̓ ὑμῶν εἶναι.
εἰ μὲν δὴ δίκαια ποιήσω οὐκ οἶδα,
αἱρήσομαι δ̓ οὖν ὑμᾶς καὶ σὺν ὑμῖν ὅ τι ἂν δέῃ πείσομαι.
καὶ οὔποτε ἐρεῖ οὐδεὶς ὡς ἐγὼ Ἕλληνας ἀγαγὼν εἰς τοὺς βαρβάρους,
προδοὺς τοὺς Ἕλληνας τὴν τῶν βαρβάρων φιλίαν εἱλόμην,

But since you are not willing to come with me,
I must needs either give you up in exchange for Cyrus' friendship
or deceive him to stay with you.
But I don't know whether I will indeed do what is right,
in any case I'll choose you and bear whatever comes alongside you.
And no man will ever say that I led the Greeks against the barbarians,
and then gave the Greeks over and chose the friendship of the barbarians,


3.6. ἀλλ̓ ἐπεὶ ὑμεῖς ἐμοὶ οὐ θέλετε πείθεσθαι,
ἐγὼ σὺν ὑμῖν ἕψομαι καὶ ὅ τι ἂν δέῃ πείσομαι.
νομίζω γὰρ ὑμᾶς ἐμοὶ εἶναι καὶ πατρίδα καὶ φίλους καὶ συμμάχους,
καὶ σὺν ὑμῖν μὲν ἂν οἶμαι εἶναι τίμιος ὅπου ἂν ὦ,
ὑμῶν δὲ ἔρημος ὢν οὐκ ἂν ἱκανὸς οἶμαι εἶναι οὔτ̓ ἂν φίλον ὠφελῆσαι οὔτ̓ ἂν ἐχθρὸν
ἀλέξασθαι.
ὡς ἐμοῦ οὖν ἰόντος ὅπῃ ἂν καὶ ὑμεῖς οὕτω τὴν γνώμην ἔχετε.”

but since you will not obey me, I will join with you and bear what comes.
For I consider you as my country, friends and allies,
and with you I deem myself honored wherever I may be, but without you
I think myself incapable of either aiding a friend or warding off a foe.
And so, because I will also go where you go, think hard on this matter."


3.7. ταῦτα εἶπεν· οἱ δὲ στρατιῶται οἵ τε αὐτοῦ ἐκείνου
καὶ οἱ ἄλλοι ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες ὅτι οὐ φαίη παρὰ βασιλέα πορεύεσθαι ἐπῄνεσαν·
παρὰ δὲ Ξενίου καὶ Πασίωνος πλείους ἢ δισχίλιοι λαβόντες τὰ ὅπλα
καὶ τὰ σκευοφόρα ἐστρατοπεδεύσαντο παρὰ Κλεάρχῳ.

Thus he spoke. When the soldiers there, both his own and the others,
heard that he said that he would not march to the king they applauded him -
and more than two thousand of Cyrus' and Pasion's troops seized
their arms and baggage and encamped beside Clearchus.


3.8. Κῦρος δὲ τούτοις ἀπορῶν τε καὶ λυπούμενος μετεπέμπετο τὸν Κλέαρχον·
ὁ δὲ ἰέναι μὲν οὐκ ἤθελε, λάθρᾳ δὲ τῶν στρατιωτῶν πέμπων αὐτῷ ἄγγελον ἔλεγε
θαρρεῖν ὡς καταστησομένων τούτων εἰς τὸ δέον.

Cyrus was at a loss and pained by this and repeatedly summoned Clearchus -
but he refused to come, while sending a messenger to Cyrus,
without letting the soldiers know, to tell him to be confident,
as everything would be settled for the good.


3.9. μεταπέμπεσθαι δ̓ ἐκέλευεν αὐτόν· αὐτὸς δ̓ οὐκ ἔφη ἰέναι.
μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα συναγαγὼν τούς θ̓ ἑαυτοῦ στρατιώτας καὶ τοὺς προσελθόντας αὐτῷ καὶ
τῶν ἄλλων τὸν βουλόμενον, ἔλεξε τοιάδε.
“ἄνδρες στρατιῶται, τὰ μὲν δὴ Κύρου δῆλον ὅτι οὕτως ἔχει πρὸς ἡμᾶς ὥσπερ τὰ
ἡμέτερα πρὸς ἐκεῖνον· οὔτε γὰρ ἡμεῖς ἐκείνου ἔτι στρατιῶται,
ἐπεί γε οὐ συνεπόμεθα αὐτῷ, οὔτε ἐκεῖνος ἔτι ἡμῖν μισθοδότης.

But he urged him to keep summoning him -
although he himself would keep refusing to come.
After this, having assembled both his soldiers and the ones who'd joined him,
and some others who were willing, he spoke as follows:
"Fellow soldiers, certainly it is clear that Cyrus' business towards us
is just as ours towards him - for we are no longer his soldiers, 
since we do not follow him, nor is he still our paymaster.


3.10. ὅτι μέντοι ἀδικεῖσθαι νομίζει ὑφ ̓ ἡμῶν οἶδα·
ὥστε καὶ μεταπεμπομένου αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἐθέλω ἐλθεῖν,
τὸ μὲν μέγιστον αἰσχυνόμενος ὅτι σύνοιδα ἐμαυτῷ πάντα ἐψευσμένος αὐτόν,
ἔπειτα καὶ δεδιὼς μὴ λαβών με δίκην ἐπιθῇ ὧν νομίζει ὑπ̓ ἐμοῦ ἠδικῆσθαι.

However, I know that he believes that he is wronged by us -
so that even after he summoned me I refused to go,
particularly ashamed because I knew that I'd utterly deceived him,
and then fearing that he might seize me and inflict judgment on me
for wronging him.


3.11. ἐμοὶ οὖν δοκεῖ οὐχ ὥρα εἶναι ἡμῖν καθεύδειν οὐδ̓ ἀμελεῖν ἡμῶν αὐτῶν,
ἀλλὰ βουλεύεσθαι ὅ τι χρὴ ποιεῖν ἐκ τούτων.
καὶ ἕως γε μένομεν αὐτοῦ σκεπτέον μοι δοκεῖ εἶναι ὅπως ἀσφαλέστατα μενοῦμεν,
εἴ τε ἤδη δοκεῖ ἀπιέναι, ὅπως ἀσφαλέστατα ἄπιμεν, καὶ ὅπως τὰ ἐπιτήδεια ἕξομεν·
ἄνευ γὰρ τούτων οὔτε στρατηγοῦ οὔτε ἰδιώτου ὄφελος οὐδέν.

And so it seems to me that this is the time, not to sleep and neglect ourselves,
but to take counsel on what must be done about this.
And so long as we stay here I think that we must consider how best to stay safe,
and if we decide to leave at once, how to leave most safely,
and how to carry our provisions -
for without those there is no good from either a general or a soldier.


3.12. ὁ δ̓ ἀνὴρ πολλοῦ μὲν ἄξιος ᾧ ἂν φίλος ᾖ,
χαλεπώτατος δ̓ ἐχθρὸς ᾧ ἂν πολέμιος ᾖ, ἔχει δὲ δύναμιν καὶ πεζὴν
καὶ ἱππικὴν καὶ ναυτικὴν ἣν πάντες ὁμοίως ὁρῶμέν τε καὶ ἐπιστάμεθα·
καὶ γὰρ οὐδὲ πόρρω δοκοῦμέν μοι αὐτοῦ καθῆσθαι.
ὥστε ὥρα λέγειν ὅ τι τιςγιγνώσκει ἄριστον εἶναι.”

Now the man is worth much to whomever is his friend,
but most dangerous to whomever is his enemy,
he has forces - foot and horse and naval - that we all see and likewise know. 
and indeed we seem to be sitting not very far away from him.
And so it is the time for any man to say what he judges to be best."


3.13. ταῦτα εἰπὼν ἐπαύσατο. ἐκ δὲ τούτου ἀνίσταντο οἱ μὲν ἐκ τοῦ αὐτομάτου,
λέξοντες ἃ ἐγίγνωσκον, οἱ δὲ καὶ ὑπ̓ ἐκείνου ἐγκέλευστοι,
ἐπιδεικνύντες οἵα εἴη ἡ ἀπορία ἄνευ τῆς Κύρου γνώμης καὶ μένειν καὶ ἀπιέναι.

After saying this he stopped.
Of who stood to speak, some did so of their free own will,
and said what they thought, while others, instructed by Clearchus,
described how hard it would be to either stay or leave without Cyrus' say-so.


3.14. εἷς δὲ δὴ εἶπε προσποιούμενος σπεύδειν ὡς τάχιστα πορεύεσθαι
εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα στρατηγοὺς μὲν ἑλέσθαι ἄλλους ὡς τάχιστα,
εἰ μὴ βούλεται Κλέαρχος ἀπάγειν· τὰ δ̓ ἐπιτήδει ̓ ἀγοράζεσθαι
(ἡ δ ̓ ἀγορὰ ἦν ἐν τῷ βαρβαρικῷ στρατεύματι)
καὶ συσκευάζεσθαι· ἐλθόντας δὲ Κῦρον αἰτεῖν πλοῖα, ὡς ἀποπλέοιεν·
ἐὰν δὲ μὴ διδῷ ταῦτα, ἡγεμόνα αἰτεῖν Κῦρον ὅστις διὰ φιλίας τῆς χώρας ἀπάξει.
ἐὰν δὲ μηδὲ ἡγεμόνα διδῷ, συντάττεσθαι τὴν ταχίστην,
πέμψαι δὲ καὶ προκαταληψομένους τὰ ἄκρα,
ὅπως μὴ φθάσωσι μήτε Κῦρος μήτε οἱ Κίλικες καταλαβόντες,
ὧν πολλοὺς καὶ πολλὰ χρήματα ἔχομεν ἀνηρπακότες.”
οὗτος μὲν τοιαῦτα εἶπε· μετὰ δὲ τοῦτον Κλέαρχος εἶπε τοσοῦτον.

But there was one man who spoke, pretending to urge them 
to set out for Greece as quickly as possible,
to choose other generals as quickly as possible -
for fear that Clearchus wouldn't want to lead them -
to buy provisions (the marketplace was in the foreigner's army) and pack -
to ask Cyrus for ships so they could sail away.
And if he would not give them ships,
then to ask him ffor a guide to lead them through a friendly country.
And if he wouldnf't give them a guide, to very quickly draw themselves up,
and also to send men to seize the heights beforehand,
to keep them out of the hands of both Cyrus and the Cilicians,
"from whom we have snatched up many men and much gold."
He spoke these Lwords - after him Clearchus said only this:


3.15. “ὡς μὲν στρατηγήσοντα ἐμὲ ταύτην τὴν στρατηγίαν μηδεὶς ὑμῶν λεγέτω·
πολλὰ γὰρ ἐνορῶ δἰ ἃ ἐμοὶ τοῦτο οὐ ποιητέον·
ὡς δὲ τῷ ἀνδρὶ ὃν ἂν ἕλησθε πείσομαι ᾗ δυνατὸν μάλιστα,
ἵνα εἰδῆτε ὅτι καὶ ἄρχεσθαι ἐπίσταμαι ὥς τις καὶ ἄλλος μάλιστα ἀνθρώπων.

"Let no man among you say that I am to lead this army -
for I see many things that persuade me that I should not do this -
but I will obey the man whom you would chose in whatever way I can,
so that you may know that I, too, know how to be led 
as well as anyone else of mankind.


3.16. μετὰ τοῦτον ἄλλος ἀνέστη,
ἐπιδεικνὺς μὲν τὴν εὐήθειαν τοῦ τὰ πλοῖα αἰτεῖν κελεύοντος,
ὥσπερ πάλιν τὸν στόλον Κύρου ποιουμένου,
ἐπιδεικνὺς δὲ ὡς εὔηθες εἴη ἡγεμόνα αἰτεῖν παρὰ τούτου ᾧ λυμαινόμεθα τὴν πρᾶξιν.
εἰ δὲ καὶ τῷ ἡγεμόνι πιστεύσομεν ὃν ἂν Κῦρος διδῷ, τί
κωλύει καὶ τὰ ἄκρα ἡμῖν κελεύειν Κῦρον προκαταλαβεῖν;

After this another man stood up,
pointing out the foolishness of the mand who'd urged asking for the ships,
just as if Cyrus was making his return voyage,
and pointing out how foolish it was to ask for a guide from one
"whose campaign we are ruining.
And also, if we are willing to trust the guide that Cyrus provides,
why don't we just ask Cyrus to seize the heights for us beforehand as well?


3.17. ἐγὼ γὰρ ὀκνοίην μὲν ἂν εἰς τὰ πλοῖα ἐμβαίνειν ἃ ἡμῖν δοίη,
μὴ ἡμᾶς ταῖς τριήρεσι καταδύσῃ,
φοβοίμην δ̓ ἂν τῷ ἡγεμόνι ὃν δοίη ἕπεσθαι, μὴ ἡμᾶς ἀγάγῃ ὅθεν οὐκ ἔσται ἐξελθεῖν·
βουλοίμην δ̓ ἂν ἄκοντος ἀπιὼν Κύρου λαθεῖν αὐτὸν ἀπελθών· ὃ οὐ δυνατόν ἐστιν.

For I myself would hesitate to board any ships that he would give us,
lest he sink us with his triemes,
I'd fear any guide that he would give us to follow,
lest he lead us somewhere that we couldn't get out of -
but I would be willing to depart without Cyrus's leave,
to depart without his notice - which is not possible.


3.18. ἀλλ̓ ἐγώ φημι ταῦτα μὲν φλυαρίας εἶναι·
δοκεῖ δέ μοι ἄνδρας ἐλθόντας πρὸς Κῦρον οἵτινες ἐπιτήδειοι
σὺν Κλεάρχῳ ἐρωτᾶν ἐκεῖνον τί βούλεται ἡμῖν χρῆσθαι·
καὶ ἐὰν μὲν ἡ πρᾶξις ᾖ παραπλησία οἵᾳπερ
καὶ πρόσθεν ἐχρῆτο τοῖς ξένοις,
ἕπεσθαι καὶ ἡμᾶς καὶ μὴ κακίους εἶναι τῶν πρόσθεν τούτῳ συναναβάντων·

But I say that that is nonsense -
it seems best to me that whatever men are suitable should go to Cyrus
with Clearchus to ask him what he wants to use us for:
and if the task is similar to what he used foreigners for before,
then we also follow him, so that we wouldn't be more cowardly than
those who advanced with him before.


3.19. ἐὰν δὲ μείζων ἡ πρᾶξις τῆς πρόσθεν φαίνηται
καὶ ἐπιπονωτέρα καὶ ἐπικινδυνοτέρα,
ἀξιοῦν ἢ πείσαντα ἡμᾶς ἄγειν ἢ πεισθέντα πρὸς φιλίαν ἀφιέναι·
οὕτω γὰρ καὶ ἑπόμενοι ἂν φίλοι αὐτῷ
καὶ πρόθυμοι ἑποίμεθα
καὶ ἀπιόντες ἀσφαλῶς ἂν ἀπίοιμεν·
ὅ τι δ̓ ἂν πρὸς ταῦτα λέγῃ ἀπαγγεῖλαι δεῦρο·
ἡμᾶς δ̓ ἀκούσαντας πρὸς ταῦτα βουλεύεσθαι.

But if the task seems bigger than it was before,
both more laborious and more dangerous,
then let them ask him either to offer money to lead us
or be persuaded to discharge us in friendship -
for in this way we would follow him as friends, and willingly we would follow,
and if we were discharged then we'd depart in safety:
and whatever he should say, let them report back to us:
and after hearing it let us deliberate on these matters.


3.20. ἔδοξε ταῦτα, καὶ ἄνδρας ἑλόμενοι σὺν Κλεάρχῳ πέμπουσιν
οἳ ἠρώτων Κῦρον τὰ δόξαντα τῇ στρατιᾷ.
ὁ δ̓ ἀπεκρίνατο ὅτι ἀκούει Ἀβροκόμαν ἐχθρὸν ἄνδρα ἐπὶ τῷ Εὐφράτῃ ποταμῷ εἶναι,
ἀπέχοντα δώδεκα σταθμούς· πρὸς τοῦτον οὖν ἔφη βούλεσθαι ἐλθεῖν·
κἂν μὲν ᾖ ἐκεῖ, τὴν δίκην ἔφη χρῄζειν ἐπιθεῖναι αὐτῷ,
ἢν δὲ φύγῃ, ἡμεῖς ἐκεῖ πρὸς ταῦτα βουλευσόμεθα.

This seemed best, and they choose men and sent them off with Clearchus
and those men asked Cyrus the questions that had seemed best to the army.
He replied that he'd heard that his enemy Ambrocomas was on the Euphrates River,
twelve stages away.
He said that he therefore wanted to march against this man,
and that if he were there, he wanted to punish him,
"but if he has fled, we will deliberate on these matters there."


3.21. ἀκούσαντες δὲ ταῦτα οἱ αἱρετοὶ ἀγγέλλουσι τοῖς στρατιώταις·
τοῖς δὲ ὑποψία μὲν ἦν ὅτι ἄγει πρὸς βασιλέα, ὅμως δὲ ἐδόκει ἕπεσθαι.
προσαιτοῦσι δὲ μισθόν·
ὁ δὲ Κῦρος ὑπισχνεῖται ἡμιόλιον πᾶσι δώσειν οὗ πρότερον ἔφερον,
ἀντὶ δαρεικοῦ τρία ἡμιδαρεικὰ τοῦ μηνὸς τῷ στρατιώτῃ·
ὅτι δὲ ἐπὶ βασιλέα ἄγοι οὐδὲ ἐνταῦθα ἤκουσεν οὐδεὶς ἐν τῷ γε φανερῷ.

After the representatives heard this they reported back to the soldiers.
They still had a suspicion that he was going to lead them against the king,
but it seemed best to follow him.
But they did ask for additional wages, and Cyrus promised to give them all
half again more over what they'd been getting before,
three half-Darics instead of one Daric coin per month per soldier.
But that he might lead them against the king - nobody heard that even then,
at least, not openly.


4.1. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας δέκα ἐπὶ τὸν Ψάρον ποταμόν,
οὗ ἦν τὸ εὖρος τρία πλέθρα.
ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμὸν ἕνα παρασάγγας πέντε ἐπὶ τὸν Πύραμον ποταμόν,
οὗ ἦν τὸ εὖρος στάδιον. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμοὺς δύο παρασάγγας
πεντεκαίδεκα εἰς Ἰσσούς,
τῆς Κιλικίας ἐσχάτην πόλιν ἐπὶ τῇ θαλάττῃ οἰκουμένην, μεγάλην καὶ εὐδαίμονα.

From there he marched ten parasangs in two stages to the Psarus River,
where it was three hundred feet across.
Next he marched for five parasangs in one stage to the Pyramus River,
where it was six hundred feet across.
Then he marched for fifteen parasangs in two stages to Issus,
the last city in Cilicia, large and prosperous, and situated on the sea.


4.2. ἐνταῦθα ἔμειναν ἡμέρας τρεῖς·
καὶ Κύρῳ παρῆσαν αἱ ἐκ Πελοποννήσου νῆες τριάκοντα καὶ πέντε
καὶ ἐπ̓ αὐταῖς ναύαρχος Πυθαγόρας Λακεδαιμόνιος.
ἡγεῖτο δ̓ αὐταῖς Ταμὼς Αἰγύπτιος ἐξ Ἐφέσου, ἔχων ναῦς ἑτέρας Κύρου πέντε
καὶ εἴκοσιν, αἷς ἐπολιόρκει Μίλητον, ὅτε Τισσαφέρνει φίλη ἦν,
καὶ συνεπολέμει Κύρῳ πρὸς αὐτόν.

He stayed there for three days -
and thirty-five ships arrived there from Peloponnesia for Cyrus,
along with the admiral in command of them, Pythagoras the Spartan.
Tamus the Egyptian had guided them from Ephesus.
He had another twenty-five of Cyrus' ships with which he'd besieged Miletus,
when it was allied with Tissaphernes and he and Cyrus had been at war with him.


4.3. παρῆν δὲ καὶ Χειρίσοφος Λακεδαιμόνιος ἐπὶ τῶν νεῶν,
μετάπεμπτος ὑπὸ Κύρου, ἑπτακοσίους ἔχων ὁπλίτας, ὧν ἐστρατήγει παρὰ Κύρῳ.
αἱ δὲ νῆες ὥρμουν παρὰ τὴν Κύρου σκηνήν.
ἐνταῦθα καὶ οἱ παρὰ Ἀβροκόμα μισθοφόροι Ἕλληνες ἀποστάντες ἦλθον
παρὰ Κῦρον τετρακόσιοι ὁπλῖται καὶ συνεστρατεύοντο ἐπὶ βασιλέα.

On board was also Cheirisophus the Spartan, who'd been summoned by Cyrus,
with seven hundred hoplites that he commanded alongside Cyrus.
They moored the ships next to Cyrus' tent.
The Greek mercenaries who had deserted Ambrocomas - four hundred hoplites -
also came to Cyrus there and joined the campaign against the king.


4.4. ἐντεῦθεν ἐξελαύνει σταθμὸν ἕνα παρασάγγας πέντε ἐπὶ πύλας
τῆς Κιλικίας καὶ τῆς Συρίας.  ἦσαν δὲ ταῦτα δύο τείχη,
καὶ τὸ μὲν ἔσωθεν <τὸ> πρὸ τῆς Κιλικίας Συέννεσις εἶχε καὶ Κιλίκων φυλακή,
τὸ δὲ ἔξω τὸ πρὸ τῆς Συρίας βασιλέως ἐλέγετο φυλακὴ φυλάττειν.
διὰ μέσου δὲ ῥεῖ τούτων ποταμὸς Κάρσος ὄνομα, εὖρος πλέθρου.
ἅπαν δὲ τὸ μέσον τῶν τειχῶν ἦσαν στάδιοι τρεῖς·
καὶ παρελθεῖν οὐκ ἦν βίᾳἦν γὰρ ἡ πάροδος στενὴ καὶ τὰ τείχη εἰς τὴν θάλατταν καθήκοντα,
ὕπερθεν δ̓ ἦσαν πέτραι ἠλίβατοι· ἐπὶ δὲ τοῖς τείχεσιν ἀμφοτέροις ἐφειστήκεσαν πύλαι.

From there he marched five parasangs in a single stage to the gates of Cilicia and Syria.
These gates were made up of two walls, the inner one faced Cilicia and
was held by Syennesis and a watch of Cilicians, while the outer one faced Syria
and was said to be guarded by a watch of the king's men.
Between these two walls flows a river, a hundred feet across, called the Carcus.
The entire space between the walls was three stadias -
and it was not possible to get through it by force,
for the approach was narrow and the walls extended into the sea -
above were steep rocks, and gates had been set into either wall.






4.5. ταύτης ἕνεκα τῆς παρόδου Κῦρος τὰς ναῦς
μετεπέμψατο, ὅπως ὁπλίτας ἀποβιβάσειεν εἴσω καὶ ἔξω τῶν
πυλῶν, καὶ βιασόμενος τοὺς πολεμίους εἰ φυλάττοιεν ἐπὶ ταῖς
